(A novel of de-formation: Cormac McCarthy’s *Child of God* as a postmodern Gothic parody of the Bildungsroman

Mona Jafari ^1:

Maryam Soltan Beyad ^1 & Zohreh Ramin ^1

Cormac McCarthy’s ﬁction has been widely acclaimed for its unstinting exploration of the subterranean recesses of human subjectivity and its inarticulate horrors. His third novel, *Child of God* (1973), achieves the foregoing by tapping into Gothic and postmodern features, both of which demonstrate a corresponding concern with human subjectivity. As a literary tradition intimately intertwined with the teleological discourse of humanism, the *Bildungsroman* or the novel of formation can provide an optimal point of departure for participation in the contemporary debate on human subjectivity. Despite the distinct imbrication between *Child of God* and the Bildungsroman, a systematic study of its signiﬁcance vis-à-vis the novel’s stance on human subjectivity in postmodern times has not been conducted. Accordingly, the present study stakes out a new terrain in postmodern Gothic studies by establishing a line of communication between the Gothic, postmodernism, and the tradition of the Bildungsroman based on their relationship with the discourse of humanism. The interplay reconﬁgures the signiﬁcance of Gothic horror in the postmodern world. In particular, the current paper argues that *Child of God* is a postmodern parody—in accordance with Linda Hutcheon’s deﬁnition—of the Bildungsroman, which draws on subversive Gothic elements in order to make a polemic statement about the status of Man in the postmodern world. It will be demonstrated that the novel reiterates the elements of the Bildungsroman with ironic critical distance, portraying the horrid dissolution of humanist subjectivity rather than its teleological progress toward positive identity formation and social integration. It will be indicated, however, that although the protagonist edges toward posthuman monstrosity in such a way as to limn the failure of the Bildungsroman and its humanist tradition, the posthuman liminality and marginality ensuing from this disintegration are not celebrated in the novel, as its Gothicity serves to voice the consequent horrors of this dissolution.

Introduction

“Reckon you could do it now from watching? He said. Do what, said Ballard.”

—(*Child of God*, p. 58)



As one of the greatest living American novelists, Cormac McCarthy is renowned for his daunting plunge into the darkest, scarcely plumbed recesses of the human mind and subjectivity, particularly when his writing is entangled with the Gothic with its unﬂinchingly visceral confrontation with the grossly material horrors of human existence. McCarthy presents one of his most morbid explorations of human degradation and monstrosity in his third novel, *Child of God* (1973). The novel traces the life and monstrous becoming of a rural Tennessee man called Lester Ballard, who gradually turns into a cave-dwelling serial killer and follows a path to ruin. Although various studies have explored certain aspects of the novel appertaining to identity and the psychological formation of the protagonist,1 the relationship between the novel and the tradition of the *Bildungsroman* vis-à-vis human subjectivity has been afforded scant critical attention. Eric Hage is one of the very few scholars to point out the link between McCarthy’s novel and the Bildungsroman, but even his study gives it a passing mention. In *Cormac McCarthy: A Literary Companion* (2010), Hage argues that *Child of God* is “as much bildungsroman as work of grotesque horror; it just happens to be about a serial killer” (p.