As one of the greatest living American novelists, Cormac McCarthy is renowned for his daunting plunge into the darkest, scarcely plumbed recesses of the human mind and subjectivity, particularly when his writing is entangled with the Gothic with its unﬂinchingly visceral confrontation with the grossly material horrors of human existence. McCarthy presents one of his most morbid explorations of human degradation and monstrosity in his third novel, *Child of God* (1973). The novel traces the life and monstrous becoming of a rural Tennessee man called Lester Ballard, who gradually turns into a cave-dwelling serial killer and follows a path to ruin. Although various studies have explored certain aspects of the novel appertaining to identity and the psychological formation of the protagonist,1 the relationship between the novel and the tradition of the *Bildungsroman* vis-à-vis human subjectivity has been afforded scant critical attention. Eric Hage is one of the very few scholars to point out the link between McCarthy’s novel and the Bildungsroman, but even his study gives it a passing mention. In *Cormac McCarthy: A Literary Companion* (2010), Hage argues that *Child of God* is “as much bildungsroman as work of grotesque horror; it just happens to be about a serial killer” (p. 57). Nevertheless, perhaps partly because of the encyclopedic format of the book, Hage does not delve into this uncharted territory of *Child of God*, which could shed more light on the multifaceted nature of the foregoing novel as an example of the postmodern Gothic genre, particularly as it pertains to one of the most central concerns in the second half of the twentieth century, that is to say, human subjectivity. Moreover, Hage contends that McCarthy’s novel ﬁts comfortably into the tradition of the Bildungsroman, as it follows a trajectory consonant with the progressive development and self-realization of the protagonist typical of that tradition. Taking into consideration the original contribution of the discourse of humanism to the Bildungsroman and their inextricable relationship, which make for a cogent point of departure, the present study posits that *Child of God* targets the tradition of Bildungsroman or novel of formation in order to partake in the postmodern debate about the condition of human subjectivity. This study, however, dissents from Hage’s argument that the novel stands in an uncritical and harmonious relationship with the Bildungsroman. Instead, foregrounding the humanist tradition of the Bildungsroman, the current study argues that *Child of God* is a postmodern Gothic novel that parodies the tradition of the Bildungsroman and its humanist ideals. It will be demonstrated that the use of parody in the novel corresponds to Linda Hutcheon’s deﬁnition of postmodern parody propounded in her *A Theory of Parody* (1985) and *A Poetics of Postmodernism* (1988), as “imitation characterized by ironic inversion” (2000, p. 6). Exploring the intimate connection between the Bildungsroman and humanist principles, this study will subsequently indicate that the target of this parodic reprise of the Bildungsroman is speciﬁcally its reliance on such humanist notions as self-acculturation, self-empowering reason, mastery, social acceptance, and harmony. Furthermore, it is indicated that this parodic representation is actualized by dint of the Gothic, whose parodic nature and horror-ﬁlled obsession with human subjectivity dovetails with and ampliﬁes its correlates in postmodernism. As a result, the disturbing playfulness of the Gothic, intensiﬁed by its combination with postmodern ontological and epistemological subversion, which lends *Child of God* its concurrently “comic and tragic” tenor (Pacientino, 2006, p. 199), disrupts the wonted path of the Bildungsroman toward positive

2

development and social acceptance, thereby registering the critical

“difference at the heart of similarity” characteristic of postmodern parody (Hutcheon, 2000, p. 8). In other words, the advancement of the narrative depicts the disintegration of the humanist subjectivity in lieu of its positive consummation, leading, instead, to the formation of a posthuman subject with monstrous overtones and radically liminal, as well as marginal, modes of existence. The parodic representation of the *Bildungsroman* serves as a semitransparent pall beneath which *Child of God* lends voice to the Gothic horrors of the dissolving humanist subjectivity in the postmodern world. Accordingly, this study probes into a fresh reconceptualization of the signiﬁcance of Gothic horror within a postmodern context as depicted in McCarthy’s novel.