## Conclusion

Cormac McCarthy’s *Child of God* tackles the crisis of Man and its haunting horrors in a postmodern world of disorienting alienation and decentred subjectivity. To achieve the foregoing, the novel fuses Gothic and postmodern elements into a synergy calibrated for the optimal representation of the horrid disintegration of a master narrative about humanity, namely humanism. Since one of the paradigmatic literary incarnations of the discourse of humanism is the *Bildungsroman*, it provides the novel with an apt target in the postmodern debate about the condition of human subjectivity. In particular, *Child of God* addresses the crisis of Man by establishing a speciﬁc line of communication with the Bildungsroman through postmodern parody in such a way as to both partake in and critique the tradition’s humanist ideals. Thus, *Child of God* can be interpreted as a postmodern parody of the tradition of the Bildungsroman in accordance with Linda Hutcheon’s deﬁnition of postmodern parody as “imitation characterized by ironic inversion” (2000, p. 6), which is itself a corollary of the postmodern crisis of subjectivity. The target of this parodic reprise of the *Bildungsroman* is speciﬁcally its reliance on such humanist notions as self-acculturation, self-empowering reason, mastery, social acceptance, and harmony. Exploiting the synergic relationship between the Gothic and postmodernism, the novel relies on the Gothic and its indelible association with the primitive, the barbaric, the tabooed, monstrosity, and horror in order to consummate the parodic representation. Accordingly, the disturbing playfulness of the Gothic that complements postmodern parody disrupts the typical path of the Bildungsroman toward positive development and social incorporation. In particular, the setting and characterization are the two vital components that enact and mirror the theme and plot in the Bildungsroman. Similarly, the Gothic cogs in *Child of God*’s machine of postmodern parody operate primarily in the setting and the characterization of the protagonist, who follows a path toward posthuman subjectivity, which the novel equates with monstrosity. Above all, the Gothic degeneration of the setting crystallizes in Ballard’s habitation shifts from a relatively civilized house to a cave, a cage, the dissection table of a medical school, a plastic bag, and ultimately a remote cemetery reserved for outcasts. Thus, in lieu of progressing towards a better condition of life and positive social integration, which are often mirrored in and facilitated by the setting, the Gothic setting of *Child of God* is characterized by subversive degeneration consonant with the physical and psychological degeneration of the protagonist. Similarly, the Gothic lineaments in characterization undercut the teleology of individuality that informs the Bildungsroman. Rather than approximate the ideal Man, the protagonist becomes a posthuman monster, who, as the harbinger of category crisis, threatens the very essence of human subjectivity. Ballard occupies the space between such binary oppositions as human/beast, male/female, and civilized/primitive.

He seeks companionship and ventures to ﬁnd it in a collection of posthuman beings, namely corpses, which reﬂect his own posthuman mode of existence. Thus, Ballard’s life becomes increasingly crowded with animals and then corpses, rather than an accommodating community of people. Moving from real and toy animals to posthuman corpses, the non-human community escalates in a way that echoes Ballard’s progressive alienation and dehumanization. Therefore, Ballard’s category crises are also degenerative as he passes through regressive stages of the posthuman, ultimately becoming an apparition to rematerialise in new shapes.