On the screen as well as in certain novels, Gothic narratives display a more serious ‘literary’ or self-conscious aspect. In this respect they echo the concerns about narrative that are embedded in Gothic writing from its beginnings, concerns about the limits, effects and power of representation in the formation of identities, realities and institutions. Gothic devices are all signs of the superficiality, deception and duplicity of narratives and verbal or visual images.

In a century that has become increasingly sceptical about the values and practices associated with modernity and perceives these values as powerful fictions or grand narratives, new and yet familiar terrors and horrors emerge to present the dissolution of all order, meaning and identity in a play of signs, images and texts. One of the principal horrors lurking throughout Gothic fiction is the sense that there is no exit from the darkly illuminating labyrinth of language.

The diffusion of Gothic forms and figures over more than two centuries makes the definition of a homogeneous generic category exceptionally difficult.

Changing features, emphases and meanings disclose Gothic writing as a mode that exceeds genre and categories, restricted neither to a literary school nor to a historical period. The diffusion of Gothic features across texts and historical periods distinguishes the Gothic as a hybrid form, incorporating and transforming other literary forms as well as developing and changing its own conventions in relation to newer modes of writing. In many ways the multiple origins of Gothic writing highlight its diverse composition. While certain devices and plots, what might be called the staples of the Gothic, are clearly identifiable in early Gothic texts, the tradition draws on medieval romances, supernatural, Faustian and fairy tales, Renaissance drama, sentimental, picaresque and confessional narratives as well as the ruins, tombs and nocturnal speculations that fascinated Graveyard poets.

Apart from the period in which the key Gothic texts were produced, a period extending from Horace Walpole’s *The Castle of* *Otranto* (1764) to Charles Maturin’s *Melmoth the Wanderer* (1820), it is impossible to define a fixed set of conventions. Even these dates seem arbitrary, straddling as they do the eras dominated by neoclassical and Romantic writing. Gothic forms, moreover, are not only shaped by literatures of the past: the styles prevailing in the respective presents in which they were produced also provide their specific shape. Nowhere is this more evident than in the shifts that occurred within Gothic writing in the move from a neoclassical to a Romantic context, and in the various, and differently marked, descriptions of texts as novels, romances or tales. Gothic writing emerges and takes shape in relation to dominant literary practices, a relationship that is as much anti-thetical as imitative. In the changes of Gothic sites of terror and horror in the nineteenth century, uncanny shadows were cast on the privileged loci of realism.

Existing in relation to other forms of writing, Gothic texts have generally been marginalised, excluded from the sphere of acceptable literature. Their popularity within an expanding readership in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as novels borrowed a volume at a time from circulating libraries or in the form of stories in the periodical magazines that indulged the appetite for tales of terror or as burlesques and melodramas produced for the stage, was a clear sign of their tastelessness and vulgarity. In the realm of popular culture, however, Gothic writing thrived and exerted an influence on more properly literary forms. From the high cultural position associated with Literature, Gothic not only signified popular fiction but remained a darker undercurrent to the literary tradition itself.