This introductory volume draws on the different issues and perspectives informing and structuring critical interpretations and reinterpretations: it is an effect of previous writing, a selective composite of various critical readings which, while referring to no specific critical statement other than those by contemporary reviewers, remains indebted to the history of Gothic criticism. The most informative work on different aspects of Gothic writing and using different approaches is cited in the bibliography.

The following overview will indicate the variety of ways criticism has engaged with Gothic writing, engagements that are clearly affected by changing critical positions. In the early part of the twentieth century, from the 1920s, Gothic writing was discussed as a subgenre, of peripheral interest as part of general literary historical surveys discussing the development of the novel.

Michael Sadleir’s interest was a result of the list of ‘horrid’ novels cited in Jane Austen’s *Northanger Abbey* (1818). In J.M.S.Tompkins’s study of the popular novel various themes and characteristics of Gothic were situated within a general literary historical context, while Edith Birkhead examined particular tales more closely in terms of their literary merit. More favourable accounts of Gothic novels were offered in Montague Summers’s, and subsequently Devendra Varma’s, critical histories. The appeal, for them, of Gothic writing lay in its opposition to realism and rationalism, in its quest for a realm beyond the empirical and material world, for a realm of the mysterious, mystical and holy.

For them, terror and horror are linked to awe and dread as ways of representing a human quest for metaphysical, religious experience in a secular age. While, in *The Gothic Quest* (1938), Summers traced Gothic influences into the twentieth century, it is in examining the classical Gothic texts and in Romanticism that his work holds most interest. He initiated attempts at classifying different Gothic texts. Categories of ‘supernatural-’, ‘historical-’, ‘rational-’ and ‘terror-Gothic’ have, since Summers, been amended in Varma’s work, in G.R.Thompson’s collections, and in Robert Hume’s and Robert Platzner’s debate, in order to account for different Gothic features and effects, especially that of horror.

Much of this critical work focuses on the relation between Gothic and Romantic writing. Broader definitions of Romanticism, like those by Eino Railo and Mario Praz, include Gothic writings, but as examples of less ideal themes of violence, incest, passion and agony: Gothic becomes the dark or negative side to Romanticism. In the contrasts displayed in Gothic presentations of darker themes, criticism finds an explicit invitation to indulge in traditional psychoanalysis: Gothic becomes a fiction of unconscious desire, a release of repressed energies and antisocial fantasies. Themes of the divided nature of the human constitution have become established ways of discussing Gothic texts: dualities of mind and body, reason and desire, are repeatedly invoked. Popular Freudianism, assimilated by nineteenth-century notions of human duality, is ubiquitous, informing texts like Robert Kiely’s and Masao Miyoshi’s on the romantic novel and the divided self.