David Punter’s exhaustive survey of Gothic literature is similarly Freudian, though heavily tempered by Marxist criticism. Punter’s analysis, like Franco Moretti’s accounts of *Frankenstein* and *Dracula,* focuses on issues of class by relating Gothic texts to anxieties about aristocratic and bourgeois power, as well as the fears about the monstrous proletariat and forms of alienation. Since de Sade’s ‘Reflections on the Novel’, Gothic has been linked to revolutionary energies, a connection recently examined by Ronald Paulson. With Ellen Moers’s notion of ‘female Gothic’ as a mode of addressing fears about sexuality and childbirth, one of the most significant directions in recent Gothic criticism was laid out. A challenge to, or interrogation of, forms of fiction dominated by patriarchal assumptions, Gothic novels have been reassessed as part of a wider feminist critical movement that recovers suppressed or marginalised writing by women and addresses issues of female experience, sexual oppression and difference.

Extensive interrogations of traditional literary and cultural institutions, related to those enunciated in Marxist and feminist criticism, have emerged in the wake of structuralist theory. Stressing the role of linguistic structures and differences in the formation of cultural meanings, post-structuralist criticisms have attended to relations of textual, sexual and historical production and reproduction. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s book on Gothic conventions disclosed the textuality of the genre, the play of narrative surfaces and metaphors that undermine assumptions of depth and hidden meaning. The link between textuality, power and desire in Gothic fiction has been theorised by Jerrold Hogle, and a recent book, *Gothic* *Writing* (1993), by Robert Miles has examined the discursive frameworks enabling the production of earlier Gothic writing. Several critical essays on specific Gothic texts have begun to interpret the genre’s relation to notions of identity, sexuality, power and imperialism. Indeed, from the eighteenth century onwards, Gothic texts have been involved in constructing and contesting distinctions between civilisation and barbarism, reason and desire, self and other.

Gothic excesses and transgressions repeatedly return to particular images and particular loci. Familial and sexual relations, power and suppression, turn on the roles and figures of father and daughter. In villains, masculine sovereignty is staged and scrutinised. Old castles, houses and ruins, as in wild landscapes and labyrinthine cities, situate heroines and readers at the limits of normal worlds and mores. Historical events or imagined pasts, also, delineate the boundaries of the normalised present in a movement, an interplay, that leaves neither where they were. In its crossing of boundaries, however, Gothic is a mobile and specific form. For the images and figures that are reiterated constitute a place where cultural fears and fantasies are projected. Thus similar figures have different significances, depending on the culture that uses them. Indeed, this is the pattern of Gothic as a genre that, in generating and refracting diverse objects of fear and anxiety, transforms its own shape and focus. In structuring this book along conventional chronological lines, cultural and historical discontinuities as well as continuities can be plotted, demonstrating the major shifts in Gothic production as well as the persistence of certain patterns. Drawing on newer critical work as well as earlier studies, this introduction anticipates future examinations of the ways Gothic texts produce, reinforce and undermine received ideas about literature, nation, gender and culture.